
Transcriber's Note: Minor typographical errors have been corrected
without note. Irregularities and inconsistencies in the text have
been retained as printed. Words printed in italics are noted with
underscores: _italics_. Words printed in bold are noted with tildes:
~bold~.




PRACTICAL PSYCHOMANCY

AND

CRYSTAL GAZING


_By WILLIAM WALKER ATKINSON_


_A Course of Lessons on_

_The Psychic Phenomena of Distant Sensing, Clairvoyance, Psychometry,
Crystal Gazing, Etc._


Printed by
YOGA PUBLICATION SOCIETY

ISBN 0-911662-41-3

Copyright 1908




TABLE OF CONTENTS


LESSON I--THE NATURE OF PSYCHOMANCY                                 5

Interesting, scientific principles underlying Psychomancy. Sensing
objects by the Astral Senses. The three classes of Psychomancy. The
phenomena of the Astral Vision. The Astral Tube. Projection of the
Astral Body.

LESSON II--HOW TO DEVELOP YOURSELF                                 15

The Dawn of the Psychic Faculties. Auric Colors. Visions. Development
Methods. Concentration. Visualization. Psychometry. The Magic Mirror.
How to use the Crystal and Mirror. General Instruction.

LESSON III--SIMPLE PSYCHOMANCY                                     27

Simple and Space Psychomancy and their differences. Sensitivity to
Impressions. "Feeling" the Thought of Others. Seeing Through Solid
Objects. Seeing Down Into the Earth. Telescopic and Microscopic Vision.
Diagnosis of Disease by Psychomancy.

LESSON IV--THE ASTRAL TUBE                                         36

This most interesting study is stated clearly, so that all may readily
understand this fundamental principle of Psychic Communication.

LESSON V--PSYCHOMETRY                                              41

Locating persons by a lock of hair, etc. Reading a person's
characteristics, past history, etc. Describing distant scenes from
flowers, etc. Describing mines from bits of minerals, etc. Reading the
past associations of an object.

LESSON VI--CRYSTAL GAZING                                          45

Revival of a Lost Science. Various forms of Crystal Gazing. Directions
of "How to Do It," etc.

LESSON VII--ASTRAL PROJECTION                                      51

Projecting the Astral Body. Materializing one's self. Taking part in
Distant Scenes, Events and Conversations. Showing one's self to Absent
Friends. What the trained experimentor may do. The English Society's
reports upon Psychic Phenomena along these lines. The Living Ghost
within each of us. Traveling in the Astral.

LESSON VIII--SPACE PSYCHOMANCY                                     59

What it means, and what may be accomplished by means of it.
Swedenborg's, and others', wonderful experiences. Truth stranger
than fiction. Scientific facts reading like a romance.

LESSON IX--PAST TIME PSYCHOMANCY                                   68

Sensing the scenes, occurrences and objects of the Past, by Astral
Vision. A most fascinating subject, and one of importance to those
having or developing Psychic Power.

LESSON X--FUTURE TIME PSYCHOMANCY                                  76

Reading the Future. Future events cast their shadows before. Destiny
and Fate. Premonitions, Previsions and Second Sight. The wonderful
prevision and prediction of Cazotte, and its amusing sequel.

LESSON XI--DREAM PSYCHOMANCY                                       84

Psychomancy during sleep. The Phenomena of Psychic Dreams and Visions.
Traveling in the Astral while asleep. Remarkable and well authenticated
cases of Psychic Dreams and Visions, true and verified. This lesson
will explain many similar instances in your own experience.




LESSON I.

THE NATURE OF PSYCHOMANCY.


The term "Psychomancy" (pronounced, "sy-ko-man-see"), is derived from
two Greek words, the first "psycho," meaning "the soul; the mind; the
understanding" (and generally used to indicate "psychic" or unusual
powers of the soul or mind); the second word, "mancy" meaning "to
divine; to foresee, or foreknow; to detect secret things,"--and in
occult parlance, "~to sense~," or "to receive impressions by the
Astral Senses." So the word, as we use it, may be said to mean "Psychic
Sensing," and in this work will be so used. The word "Psychomancer"
means "one practicing Psychomancy;" and the word "Psychomantic" means
"relating to Psychomancy."

The word "Clairvoyance" is frequently used by people to designate some
of the phases of Psychomancy, but strictly speaking this term is
incorrect when used in this sense, the true occult meaning of the word
"Clairvoyance," being "transcendental vision, or the perception of
beings on another plane of existence--the seeing of disembodied souls,
elementals, etc." And so, in this work, we shall consider the true
phenomena of Clairvoyance, as distinct from that of Psychomancy.

In this work, we shall regard as the true phenomena of Psychomancy, all
the various phenomena known as Psychometry; Crystal Gazing; Perceiving
Distant Scenes; a perception of Past Events, and Indication of Future
Events; either in the full waking state; the state of reverie; or the
state of dreams.

And, so this work will examine, consider, and explain, the various
phases of phenomena above indicated--in short, the phenomena of
~"sensing" objects by means of Astral Senses~, omitting the phenomena
of Clairvoyance, or seeing disembodied souls, etc., which we regard as
belonging to a different phase of the general subject, and which
require special consideration and examination.

The majority of works upon these lines begin by an elaborate attempt to
"prove" the reality of the phenomena in question. But we shall not fall
into this error, for such we regard it. The time for the necessity of
such proof is past. The records of the Societies for Psychical Research
are full of proofs, and evidence, which are as full, complete and
strong as ever required by any court to hang or clear a man. And the
book shelves of the libraries are full of other books, giving like
proof. And, for that matter, this work is not written to convince
people of the truth of this phenomena--it is intended for those who
have already convinced themselves of its reality, but who wish for
specific information regarding its nature, manner of manifestation,
etc. Where we quote instances of the manifestation of some form of
Psychomantic phenomena, in this work, we do so simply to illustrate the
characteristics of some particular form of the phenomena, and not as
corroborative proof. With this explanation, we propose plunging right
into the main subject itself.

There have been many attempted explanations of, and theories regarding
the phenomena of Psychomancy, some of which are more or less plausible,
while others are quite visionary, "wild," and fantastic. In this work,
we shall pay no attention to those more or less ingenious "guesses" of
the theorists, but shall, instead, give you plainly, clearly, and
simply, the time-honored teachings of the advanced Occultists which
teachings we believe to be the Truth, tested and tried by centuries of
investigation, and experiment.


THE ASTRAL SENSES.

The Occult Teachings inform us that in addition to the Five Physical
Senses possessed by man, viz: Seeing; Feeling; Hearing; Tasting; and
Smelling; each of which has its appropriate sense organ, every
individual is also possessed of Five Astral Senses, which form a part
of what is known to Occultists as the Astral Body. These Astral Senses,
which are the astral counterparts of the five physical senses, operate
upon what Occultists call the Astral Plane, which is next above the
Physical Plane, in the Sevenfold Scale of Planes. Just as do the
Physical Senses operate upon the Physical Plane, so do the Astral
Senses operate upon the Astral Plane.

By means of these Astral Senses, one may sense outside objects without
the use of the physical senses usually employed. And it is through this
sensing by these Astral Senses, that the phenomena of Psychomancy
becomes possible.

By the employment of the Astral Sense of Seeing, the Psychomancer is
able to perceive occurrences, scenes, etc., at a distance sometimes
almost incredibly far; to see through solid objects; to see records of
past occurrences in the Astral Ether; and to see Future Scenes thrown
ahead in Time, like the shadows cast by material objects--"coming
events cast their shadows before," you have heard. By the use of the
Astral Sense of Hearing, he is able to sense sounds over immense
distances and often after the passage of great periods of time, for the
Astral vibrations continue for many years.

The Astral senses of Taste and Smell are seldom used, although there
are abundant proofs of their existence. The Astral Sense of Feeling
enables the Psychomancer to become aware of certain occurrences on the
Astral Plane, and to perceive impressions, mental and otherwise, that
are being manifested at a distance. The Astral Sense of Feeling may be
explained as being rather a sense of "Awareness," than a mere
"Feeling," inasmuch as the Psychomancer, through its channel, becomes
"aware" of certain occurrences, other than by Astral Sight or Hearing,
and yet which is not "Feeling" as the word is used on the Physical
Plane. It may be well called "Sensing" for want of a better name, and
manifests in a vague consciousness or "awareness." But still we must
not overlook the fact that there are many instances of true "feeling"
on the Astral Plane, for instances, cases where the Psychomancer
actually "feels" the pain of another, which phenomena is commonly known
as "sympathetic pains," "taking on the condition," etc., etc., and
which are well known to all investigators as belonging to the phenomena
of the Astral Senses.


THE ASTRAL BODY

But, to understand the Astral Senses, one must be made acquainted with
the existence of that which Occultists know as "The Astral Body." There
is no point in the Occult Teachings better established; longer held; or
more thoroughly proven than that of the existence of the Astral Body.
This teaching of the Ancient Occultists is being corroborated by the
experiments, and investigations of the Psychic Researchers of the
present day.

The Astral Body, belonging to every person, is an exact counterpart of
the perfect physical body of the person. It is composed of fine
ethereal matter, and is usually encased in the physical body. In
ordinary cases, the detaching of the Astral Body from its physical
counterpart is accomplished only with great difficulty, but in the case
of dreams; great mental stress; and under certain conditions of occult
development, the Astral Body may become detached and sent on long
journeys, traveling at a rate of speed greater than that of light
waves. On these journeys it is always connected with the physical body
by a long filmy connecting link. If this link were to become broken,
the person would die instantly, but this is an almost unheard of
occurrence in the ordinary planes of action. The Astral Body exists a
long time after the death of the physical body, but it disintegrates in
time. It sometimes hovers around the resting place of the physical
corpse, and is mistaken for the "spirit" of the deceased person,
although really it is merely a shell or finer outer coating of the
soul. The Astral Body of a dying person is often projected to the
presence of friends and loved ones a few moments before the physical
death, the phenomenon arising from the strong desire of the dying
person to see and be seen.

The Astral Body frequently travels from its physical counterpart, in
Psychomantic phenomena, and visits scenes far distant, there sensing
what is occurring. It also leaves the body during what are known as
Psychomantic dreams; or under the influence of anaesthetics; or in some
of the deeper phases of hypnosis; when it visits strange scenes and
places, and often holds mental conversation with other Astral Bodies,
or else with disembodied entities. The jumbled and distorted
recollections of these dreams are occasioned by the brain not having
received perfect impressions transmitted to it, by reason of lack of
training, development, etc., the result being like a blurred or
distorted photographic plate.

In order to intelligently grasp the underlying principles of the
phenomena of Psychomancy, and its allied subjects, you must familiarize
yourself with the truth concerning the Astral Senses, which we have
just stated. Unless you understand and accept this truth and fact, you
will not be able to grasp the principles underlying the phenomena in
question, but will be lost in the quagmire of idle theories, and
fantastic "explanation" hazarded by investigators of psychic phenomena
who have not made themselves acquainted with the Occult Teachings which
alone give the student an intelligent key to the mysteries of the
Astral Plane.


THE THREE CLASSES

The phenomena of Psychomancy, etc., may be grouped into three classes,
each being produced by its own special class-cause. In either or all
cases, the impressions are received by and through the Astral Senses,
but there are three distinct ways in which, and by which, these
impressions are received. These ways, which we shall now proceed to
consider in detail, may be classified under the following terms:

(1) Sensing by the "quickening" of one's Astral Senses sufficient to
perceive more clearly the etheric vibrations or currents, the auric
emanations of persons and things; and similar phases of Psychomancy,
but which does not include the power to sense occurrences happening in
distant places; nor the power to sense the records of the past, or to
receive indications of the future. (See Lesson III.)

(2) Sensing by means of the "Astral Tube," erected in the Ether by the
operation of one's Will or Desire, and which acts as a Psychic
"telescope," or "microscope," with "X Ray" features. (See Lesson IV.)

(3) Sensing by means of the actual projection of one's own Astral Body
to the distant scene. (See Lesson VII.)


CLAIRAUDIENCE.

"Clairaudience" is a term sometimes used to indicate Astral Hearing.
Some writers on this subject treat "Clairaudience" as a separate class
of phenomena. But we fail to see the distinction they make. It, of
course, employs a different Astral Sense from that generally employed,
but both are Astral Senses functioning on the Astral Plane, just as the
physical senses of Seeing and Hearing function on the Physical Plane.
And, more important, both forms of Astral Sensing are subject to the
same laws and rules. In other words, all that is said in the lessons of
this book on the subject of Psychomantic Vision holds equally true of
Clairaudience.

Thus, there may be Simple ~Clairaudience~; Space ~Clairaudience~;
Past Time ~Clairaudience~; Future Time ~Clairaudience~, etc.; also
~Clairaudient~ Psychometry; ~Clairaudience~ through Crystal Gazing,
etc. Psychomantic Vision is the employment of the Astral ~Sight~, while
Clairaudience is the similar employment of the Astral ~Hearing~.

In many cases of Psychomantic Vision there is an accompaniment of
Clairaudience; while in others it may be missing. Likewise,
Psychomantic Vision usually accompanied Clairaudience, although
sometimes one may be able to ~hear~ astrally, although no seeing.

You will notice that in many of the instances of Psychomantic Vision
related in this book, there is a mention of the person ~hearing~
words or sounds, while seeing the vision--this, of course, is
Clairaudience.




LESSON II.

HOW TO DEVELOP YOURSELF.


Passing to the actual practice, we desire to inform our students that
the faculty of Psychomancy lies dormant in every person--that is the
Astral Senses are present in everyone, and the possibility of their
being awakened into activity is always present. The different degrees
of power observable in different persons depend chiefly upon the degree
of development, or unfoldment, rather than upon the comparative
strength of the faculties. In some persons, of certain temperaments,
the Astral Senses are very near the manifesting point at all times.
Flashes of what are considered to be "intuition," premonitions, etc.,
are really manifestations of Psychomancy in some phase. In the case of
other persons, on the other hand, the Astral Senses are almost
atrophied, so merged in materialistic thought and life are these
people. The element of Faith also plays an important point in this
phenomena, as it does in all Occult phenomena, for that matter. That is
to say, that one's ~belief~ tends to open up the latent powers and
faculty in man, while a corresponding ~disbelief~ tends to prevent
the unfoldment or manifestation. There is a very good psychological
reason for this as all students of the subject well know. Belief and
Disbelief are two potent psychological factors on all planes of action.

Occultists know, and teach, that the Astral Senses and faculties of the
human race will unfold as the race progresses, at which time that which
we now call Psychomantic Power will be a common possession of all
persons, just as the use of the Physical Senses are to the race at the
present time. In the meantime, there are persons who, not waiting for
the evolution of the race, are beginning to manifest this power in a
greater or lesser degree, depending much upon favorable circumstances,
etc. There are many more persons in this stage of development than is
generally realized. In fact many persons manifesting Psychomantic
power, occasionally, are apt to pass by the phenomena as "imagination,"
and "foolishness," refusing to recognize its reality. Then, again, many
persons manifest the power during sleeping hours, and dismiss the
matter as "merely a dream," etc.

Regarding this matter of the dawning of Psychomancy, a well-known
authority writes as follows: "Students often ask how this psychic
faculty will first be manifested in themselves--how they may know when
they have reached the stage at which its first faint foreshadowings are
beginning to be visible. Cases differ so widely that it is impossible
to give to this question an answer that will be universally applicable.
Some people begin by a plunge, as it were, and under some unusual
stimulus become able just for once to see some striking vision; and
very often in such a case, because the experience does not repeat
itself, the seer comes in time to believe that on that occasion he must
have been the victim of hallucination. Others begin by becoming
intermittently conscious of the brilliant colors and vibrations of the
human aura; others find themselves with increasing frequency seeing and
hearing something to which those around them are blind and deaf; others
again see faces, landscapes, or colored clouds floating before their
eyes in the dark, before they sink to rest; while perhaps the commonest
experience of all is that of those who begin to recollect with greater
and greater clearness what they have seen and heard on other planes
during sleep."

Very many persons possess respectable degrees of Simple Psychomancy,
varying from vague impressions to the full manifestation of the
faculty, as described in these lessons. Such a person has "intuitions";
"notions"; "presentiments," and the faculty of getting ideas regarding
other persons and things, other than by the usual mental processes.
Others manifest certain degrees of Psychometric powers, which develop
rapidly by practice. Others find themselves possessing certain degrees
of power of "scrying" through Crystals, which power, also, may be
developed by practice. The phases of Time Psychomancy, Past and Future;
and that of Space Psychomancy, in its higher degrees, are far more
rare, and few persons possess them, and still fewer persist in the
practice until they develop it, they lacking the patience, persistence,
and application necessary.

While it is very difficult to lay down a set method of instruction in
the Development of Psychomantic Power, owing to reasons already given,
and because of the varying temperaments, etc., of students, yet there
is possible a plan of giving general information, which if followed
will put the student upon the right path toward future development. And
this plan we shall now proceed to give the students of this little
book.


DEVELOPMENT METHODS

Concentration. In the first place, the student should cultivate the
faculty of Concentration, that is the power to hold the attention upon
an object for some time. Very few persons possess this power, although
they may think they do. The best way to develop Concentration is to
practice on some familiar and common object, such as a pencil, book,
ornament, etc. Take up the object and study it in detail, forcing the
mind to examine and consider it in every part, until every detail of
the object has been observed and noted. Then lay the object aside, and
a few hours after pick it up again and repeat the process, and you will
be surprised to see how many points you have missed on the first trial,
Repeat this until you feel that you have exhausted your object. The
next day take up another object, and repeat the process. A drill of
this kind will not only greatly develop the powers of Perception, but
will also strengthen your powers of Concentration in a manner which
will be of great value to you in Occult Development.

Visualizing. The second point of development for the student, is the
development of the faculty of Visualization. In order to Visualize you
must cultivate the faculty of forming Mental Pictures of distant
scenes, places, people, etc., until you can summon them before you at
will, when you place yourself in the proper mental condition. Another
plan is to place yourself in a comfortable position, and then make a
mental journey to some place that you have previously visited. Prepare
for the journey, and then mentally see yourself starting on your trip;
then seeing all the intermediate places and points; then arriving at
your destination and visiting the points of interest, etc.; and then
returning home. Then, later try to visit places that you have never
seen, in the same way. This is not Clairvoyance, but is a training of
the mental faculties for the exercise of the real power.

Psychometry. After you have developed yourself along the lines of
Concentration, and Visualization as above stated, you may begin to
practice Psychometry, as follows: Take a lock of hair; or handkerchief;
or ribbon; or ring; belonging to some other person, and then press it
against your forehead, lightly, closing your eyes, and assuming a
receptive and passive mental state. Then desire calmly that you
Psychometrize the past history of the object. Do not be in too much of
a hurry, but await calmly the impressions. After a while you will begin
to receive impressions concerning the person owning the object pressed
against your forehead. You will form a mental picture of the person,
and will soon begin to receive impressions about his characteristics,
etc. You may practice with a number of objects, at different times, and
will gradually develop the Psychometric power by such practice and
experiments. Remember that you are developing what is practically a new
sense, and must have perseverance and patience in educating and
unfolding it.

Another form of Psychometric development is that of tracing the past
history, surroundings, etc., of metals, minerals, etc. The process is
identical to that just described. The mineral is pressed against the
forehead, and with closed eyes the person awaits the Psychometric
impression. Some who have highly developed the faculty have been able
to describe the veins of mineral, metal, etc., and to give much
valuable information regarding same, all arising from the psychic clue
afforded by a sample of the rock, mineral, metal, etc. There are other
cases of record, in which underground streams of water have been
discovered by Psychometrists, by means of the clue given by a bit of
earth, stone, etc., from the surface. In this, as in the other phase
mentioned, ~practice~, ~practice~, ~practice~, is the summing up of
the instruction regarding development.

~Crystal Gazing.~ We consider the use of the Crystal Glass Ball,
or other forms of what the ancients called "The Magic Mirror," to be
the best plan of developing Psychomantic Power. As we have already
explained, this method serves to focus the concentrated desire, will,
and thought of the person, and thereby becomes the starting point for
the Astral Tube, of which we have frequently spoken in this work. The
student becoming proficient in this class of phenomena, passes by easy,
gradual and natural stages to the higher and more complex phases of the
subject. The "Magic Mirror" (of which the Crystal is but a form) was
used by the ancient Occultists in developing the powers of their
students, and in all countries, and in all ages, it has played a
similar part in the process of developing psychic powers, and serving
as a focal point for the erection and operation of the Astral Tube, in
Psychomancy and other forms of occult and psychic phenomena.

At this point, we wish to tell you that there is no special virtue or
magical properties or qualities in the Crystal itself--it is merely an
instrument for Astral Vision, just as the telescope, microscope and
other optical instruments are instruments employed in the phenomena of
physical vision. It is true that the atomic and molecular
characteristics of glass, crystal, etc., tend to produce the best
results, but, after all, water, ink, etc., have been, and may be
similarly used. No, there is no special "magic" in the crystal itself,
so do not allow yourself to fall into any superstition regarding its
use.

Various teachers use different forms of the Crystal, or substitutes for
it. Some of the teachers whose patrons are among the wealthier classes
of the community, insist upon their pupils possessing globes of pure
crystal, insisting that the latter alone gives the best results. But
others who have pupils among people with shorter purses, have found
that their pupils obtained just as good results by the use of a ball of
plain glass, which is inexpensive. Others have advocated the use of
watch crystals laid over a piece of black cloth, preferably velvet.
Others have used polished steel objects, or pieces of polished metal of
various kinds, a new silver coin, for instance. Others still, have used
a large drop of ink poured into a small dish, etc. Others have had cups
painted black on their inner surface, into which they poured water, and
claimed to have obtained the finest results. All the old talk about
magic ceremonies and incantations being necessary in manufacturing the
Magic Mirror, is pure nonsense, which has grown around the scientific
facts of the case, as is so often the case. Do not be deceived by any
such tomfoolery. A number of persons prefer to gaze into the bright
substance of a precious stone. So you see, when we use the term
"Crystal," we mean that the student may make his choice of any, or
several, of the above-mentioned objects, or that he may even substitute
some other object of his own choosing, possessing the requisite power
of reflection.

There are but very few directions to be given in the use of the
Crystal. Read what we have to say at the conclusion of our lesson on
"Crystal Gazing" in this book, (Lesson VI). The principal point
insisted upon by nearly all the teachers, is that of placing the back
of the gazer to the light, instead of having him face the light.

The simple general direction is that the gazer should practice by
himself, at first, in a quiet room, sitting with his back toward the
light, with the Crystal placed before him on a table, on a piece of
black cloth, or other dark material, and then gaze calmly at the
Crystal. Do not be afraid of winking, and do not strain or tire the
eyes. Some prefer making funnels of their hands, and gazing through
them just as if they were opera-glasses, and we think this plan a very
good one, for it serves to shut out distracting light, and sights. If
you fail to see anything at the first trial, do not be discouraged, but
persevere. A number of trials are necessary in some cases, while in
others wonderful results have been obtained at the first experiment.

An English authority recommends that beginners failing to get direct
results, then try to "visualize" something that they have already
seen--something familiar, such as a chair, a ring, a face, etc., and
then turning to the Crystal endeavor to reproduce it there. It is
claimed that this practice will often gradually lead to actual "seeing"
in the Crystal.

~The first signs of the actual "seeing" in the Crystal, comes in the
form of a "cloudiness," or "milky-mist" in the crystal, which slowly
resolves itself into a form, or scene, which appears gradually like the
precipitation of a photograph upon a sensitive plate in the developing
room. In some cases, the "misty" cloud deepens into a black one, from
which the pictures appear.~

~General Advice.~ In this work we give you a comprehensive, although
condensed, account of the various phases of the phenomena of
Psychomancy, together with a number of instances of typical
manifestations. By reading the following lessons, after having read
the present one, the student will be able to gather much practical
instruction on the subject of the manifestation of the power. He will
be able to understand the nature and general workings of the
phenomena, so that, when he undertakes the work of developing the
power within himself, he will recognize the indication of his
increasing power and unfolding faculties, which otherwise would "be
Greek" to him. In order to get the very best results of instruction in
this line, the student would of course do well to secure some
competent instructor who could give him personal lessons. But, the
person who has the patience and perseverance to "work the thing out
for himself," as many before him have done, will obtain results none
the less valuable because they were worked for without assistance.

We feel that we have given the students of this little work, such an
idea of the general subject, and its fundamental laws, together with
such general instruction in the methods of developing and manifesting
the power that it will be one's own fault if he fails to get at least a
fair degree of success from his undertaking self-development along
these lines. There is no royal road to occult or psychic power--or
"magic word" which when once pronounced will prove an "open Sesame" to
the Doors of Psychomancy. And we would warn the student against persons
who undertake to impart the "Secret" upon the payment of a goodly sum
of money. There is no "Secret" to be so imparted--it is all a matter,
first of general understanding, and then practice and work. To some it
comes easier than to others, but even to such, the higher degrees mean
work and practice. We trust that we have given you food for thought and
material for practice. The rest depends upon yourself.




LESSON III.

SIMPLE PSYCHOMANCY.


The phenomena of Psychomancy may be divided into three general classes,
depending upon the nature of the "seeing," as follows:

  I. Simple Psychomancy, by which is meant the power of "sensing" by
means of the Astral Senses in the degree of a mere "quickening" of the
Astral Senses sufficiently to enable one to "sense" more clearly any
etheric vibrations or currents; the auric emanations of persons and
things; and similar phases of Psychomantic phenomena; but which does
not include the power to sense actual occurrences happening in distant
places; nor the power to sense the records of the past, or to receive
indications of the future.

 II. Space Psychomancy, by which is meant the power to sense ~distant~
scenes, persons, or objects.

III. Time Psychomancy, by which is meant the power to sense objects,
events, persons, etc., in the records of the past; and also the power
to sense the indications of the future--the "shadows of coming events."

Simple Psychomancy is very much more common than is generally supposed.
Very many people are quite sensitive to "impressions" coming to them in
this way, which while akin to the impressions of Telepathy,
nevertheless belong to the higher grade of Psychic Phenomena known as
Psychomancy. It may be well to state here the difference between
ordinary Telepathic impressions, and those of Simple Psychomancy. Many
students are perplexed by the similarity between the two mentioned
classes of phenomena, and we think it advisable to set them straight
regarding the matter, at this point.

As we have stated in our previous work in this series, (entitled
"Practical Mind Reading") Telepathy is occasioned by the passage of
Thought Waves or Currents, passing from one brain to another, just as
pass the waves of Heat, Light, Electricity, etc. In Telepathy the brain
of the Transmitter sends forth the vibration, waves, or currents, and
the brain of the Receiver registers the same, receiving them by means
of the Pineal Gland which acts in a manner closer resembling that of
the receiving instrument in Wireless Telegraphy. In Telepathy there is
merely the sending and receiving of thought vibrations, ~over the
physical organs~.

But in Simple Psychomancy, the person may, and does, receive the
thought vibrations emanating from the mind of another, but not over
the physical channels, as in Telepathy, ~but by means of the Astral
Senses~. In this lies the difference.

Now, it follows that the Astral Senses being far more keen and acute
than the Physical Senses, the former will register vibrations and
impressions far more readily than the latter, and will often register
impressions that the Physical Senses (even the Pineal Gland organ) take
no account of. In this way the person in whom the Astral Senses are
even partially developed will receive impressions of the thoughts of
others that even the most acute Mind Reader will fail to notice; as
well as words actually spoken by the other person; and ideas forming in
the mind of the other person not yet expressed in active thought-waves.

But, it should be added, the development of Telepathic powers very
frequently grow into a development of Psychomantic powers, and so the
former is one of the easiest paths to the latter, and may be used in
developing Clairvoyant power, and in unfolding the Astral Senses. In
this way the person possessing even a moderate degree of Psychomantic
power often "feels" the thoughts, ideas, emotions, and other mental
states of the people around him, and knows without any words being used
just what the others are thinking and feeling. This is often perceived
by merely the increased power to receive and register the
Thought-vibrations, but in some cases the ability to sense the "Aura"
of the other persons heighten the impression.


THE AURA

The majority of our readers are familiar with the fact that all
persons, and objects, are surrounded by an emanation called an "Aura,"
or egg-shaped psychic emanation extending several feet around them.
This aura is charged with the thought-vibrations of the persons, and is
really the "atmosphere" that we feel surrounding people and by which we
feel attracted or repelled as the case may be. The trained and
developed Psychomancer is able to see the colors by which the various
emotions, thoughts, etc., are indicated, but even when that degree of
power is lacking, he may "feel" the general character of the various
component parts of the person's aura.

While it is not our intention to go deeply into this matter of Auric
Colors, in this work, still we think it well to indicate the same here,
by quoting from a well-known authority on the subject, who says: "As he
looks at a person he will see him surrounded by the luminous mist of
the astral aura, flashing with all sorts of brilliant colors, and
constantly changing in hue and brilliancy with every variation of the
person's thoughts and feelings. He will see this aura flooded with the
beautiful rose-color of pure affection; the rich blue of devotional
feeling; the hard dull brown of selfishness; the deep scarlet of anger;
the horrible lurid red of sensuality; the livid grey of fear; the black
clouds of hatred and malice; or any of the other hundredfold
indications so easily to be read in it by a practiced eye; and thus it
will be impossible for any persons to conceal from him the real state
of their feelings on any subject."

But only a comparatively few are able to distinctly ~see~ these Auric
Colors, by reason of their lack of development along these special
lines. But a great number of people are able to ~feel~ the subtle
vibrations which give rise to these colors. Just as there are well
authenticated cases of blind men and women being able to distinguish
by the sense of feeling (in touch) the various colors which their
blind eyes fail to see, so are thousands of people able to ~feel~
the auric shades which their imperfectly developed clairvoyant vision
fails to perceive. In this connection it is interesting to note that
science informs us that the sense of Feeling was the first developed
of any of the physical senses; in fact all the other senses are
developments of, and extensions of, the original sense of Feeling. And
there is a close correspondence between this phenomena of the Physical
Senses, and that of the Astral Senses.

But there are other, and perhaps more wonderful, features of Simple
Psychomancy. It is a well established scientific fact that nearly, if
not indeed all, objects are constantly emanating streams of Radiant
Energy, or Streams of Electrons as they are called by some. The
delicate instruments of science are able to detect and register some of
the coarser vibrations of this energy, but the more delicate ones have
so far escaped them. But the Astral Senses of the developed
Psychomancer register and record many of the finer vibrations, and in
this way many so-called "miracles" of occultism are explained. Let us
examine this phenomena at this point.

It becomes apparent to any student of the subject, early in his
investigations, that the Psychomancer is able to "see" things hidden
by other objects, and often surrounded by the densest matter. In other
words he is able to ~see through solid objects~--to see "through a
brick wall" to use the familiar phrase. Now this may seem almost
incredible to one at the first mention of the subject. But when the
skeptic's attention is called to the fact that the "X Rays" and
similar forms of energy recently discovered by science, readily pierce
through solid objects, and may be actually "seen" by the eye (aided by
the proper instruments), or recorded on a photographic plate--then the
impossible feat of "seeing though a brick wall" becomes a very simple,
understandable matter, indeed. And in an almost identical manner the
Psychomancer ~sees through solid object~--and ~the most solid material
becomes transparent to his Astral Sight~.

The fine streams or waves of energy constantly being emanated by all
objects, which are invisible to the naked physical eye, are registered
and recorded by the Astral Sense of Sight. The Psychomancer even by
means of the comparatively elementary power of Simple Psychomancy is
able to see what is going on in an adjoining room, or other nearby
place; to read the contents of a sealed letter; to describe the
contents of a locked, steel book; or to read a chosen passage in a
closed book.

To the developed and trained Psychomancer, when he concentrates his
power, the solid ground over which he is walking, becomes transparent,
and he is able to see down into its depths to a considerable distance.
In this way he may see living underground creatures at work, and play;
and to discover veins of mineral, coal, etc., or underground streams
of water. In these cases the Clairvoyant ~does not travel~ in the
Astral, but merely receives and perceives the subtle vibrations or
streams of fine energy constantly being emanated by the objects. Some
Clairvoyants have developed certain other less common faculties of
Astral Sight, which give the "telescopic" and "microscopic" vision in
these cases, in addition to the main faculty of "seeing" things
through solid coverings.

The question will naturally arise in the mind of the student, whether
there is any limit to the depths open to the Astral Sight of the
Psychomancer (in this phase of the phenomena), as for instance when he
is looking into the solid earth. It may be urged that as objects at
immense distances underground emanate rays just as truly as do objects
nearer the surface, then there should be no difference in the power of
vision. Answering this question we would say that the same objection
and obstacle arises in this case, as in the corresponding physical
phenomena, such as the X Rays. While a far distant object emits rays
just as well as a nearby one, still there is a loss of energy according
to distance, and the Astral Sense, like the Physical Sense, fails to
clearly register after a certain distance is attained. This distance
varies in the case of different persons using their Astral Vision, just
as it does in the case of the different degrees of eyesight possessed
by various persons. And then again, it must not be supposed that the
earth becomes as clear as glass to the Astral Vision. On the contrary
it presents a similar appearance to that obtained when one is seeing
objects through water or mist, with the physical eye. One can see quite
a way through water or mist with the physical eye, but after a certain
distance the impressions grow dim, and finally fade from view. Of
course in the case of the erecting of the Astral Tube better results
may be obtained, but this phenomena belongs to the class of Space
Psychomancy.

There is another power open to the Psychomancer along the lines of
Simple Psychomancy. We refer to the phenomena of "seeing into" the
physical bodies of other people; examining the internal organs;
diagnosing diseases, etc. Of course, in this case, before the
Clairvoyant is able to correctly diagnose a disease he must be
acquainted with the nature of the organs, and their appearance in their
normal state, etc., so that he will recognize a diseased condition when
he sees it. One must needs have an acquaintance with Anatomy and
Physiology, as well as possessing trained Psychomantic powers for this
work.




LESSON IV.

THE ASTRAL TUBE.


The term, "~The Astral Tube~," is frequently met with in the writings
of Occultists, but you will find very little more than a mention of it
in many of such works, the proverbial caution of the older writers
having acted in the direction of preventing their entering into a
fuller description or explanation, for fear of the information falling
into improper hands. This will be more readily understood, when we
tell you that the Astral Tube is, and may be, used for classes of
phenomena other than that of Psychomancy, notably that of Mental
Influencing, "treating", etc., which however forms no part of the
present work, but which will be discussed in a future volume of the
series to be called "Mental Influence, etc."

The Astral Plane is composed of an ethereal form of matter, very much
rarer and finer than the matter of the Physical Plane--but matter,
nevertheless, and subject to fixed laws and conditions. And, just as it
is possible to establish "lines of force" in the physical matter, so
may corresponding "lines of force" be established in Astral matter. And
this Astral Tube is really such a "line of force." In other words, it
is possible to set up and establish a "line of force" on the Astral
Plane, that will serve as a ready conductor of Astral vibrations,
currents, etc., and which affords a highly efficient channel of
communication between objects far removed from each other in space. And
this channel is actually created and used in a variety of forms of
Occult phenomena.


POLARIZATION.

You have heard of "Polarity," and "Polarization" in connection with
electrical phenomena. "Polarity" is defined by Webster as: "That
quality or condition of a body by virtue of which it exhibits opposite
or contrasted properties or powers, in opposite or contrasted parts or
directions; or, a condition giving rise to a contrast of properties
corresponding to a contrast of positions." And, "Polarization" is
defined by the same authority as: "Act of polarizing; state of having
polarity." Well, then, the process of erecting the Astral Tube is
practically that of the "polarization" of the particles of Astral
matter by an effort of the human Will, set in motion by means of a
strong Desire or Determination, under certain conditions.

When the human Will is directed toward a distant person or object,
under the proper psychic conditions, it tends to "polarize" a path or
channel through the Astral atmosphere toward the desired point, which
channel becomes at once an easy course of psychic communication for the
transmission or receiving of psychic impressions or expressions, as the
case may be. And, in the case of Psychomancy and kindred phenomena, the
Astral Senses of the person (even though his Astral Body be still
within its physical counterpart) are able to readily "sense" the
impressions being manifested at a far distant point in space.

The above mentioned channel of communication--the Astral Tube--has not
of course the advantages of actual travel in the Astral Body, and is
besides affected by certain Astral happenings, such as the breaking up
of the tube, or an impairment of its efficiency, by reason of some
stronger astral current or channel, etc., for instance. When one
considers the currents and cross-currents constantly in operation on
the Astral Plane, it will be seen how likely the above mentioned
interference is to happen.

Through the Astral Tube the Astral Senses actually "sense" the sights,
and often the sounds being manifested at a distance, just as one may
see distant sights through a telescope, or hear distant sounds through
a telephone, for instance. It also may be used as a microscope, as we
shall see as we proceed. The student's attention is especially directed
toward the fact that in this form of phenomena, the Psychomancer
remains within his physical body, and does not travel in the Astral at
all. He sees the distant scenes, just as a man sees them through a
telescope. His consciousness remains within his physical body.

A well known writer on this subject has truly said: "* * * the
limitations resemble those of a man using a telescope on the physical
plane. The experimenter, for example, has a particular field of view
which cannot be enlarged or altered; he is looking at his scene from a
certain direction, and he cannot suddenly turn it all around and see
how it looks from the other side. If he has sufficient psychic energy
to spare, he may drop altogether the telescope that he is using, and
manufacture an entirely new one for himself which will approach his
objective somewhat differently; but, this is not a course at all likely
to be adopted in practice. But it may be said, the mere fact that he is
using Astral Sight ought to enable him to see it from all sides at
once. And so it would, if he were using that sight in the normal way
upon an object which was fairly near him--within his astral reach as it
were; but at a distance of hundreds or thousands of miles the case is
very different. Astral sight gives us the advantage of an additional
dimension, but there is still such a thing as position in that
dimension, and it is naturally a potent factor in limiting the use of
the powers of its plane. * * * Astral sight, when it is cramped by
being directed along what is practically a tube, is limited very much
as physical sight would be under similar circumstances, though if
possessed in perfection it will continue to show, even at that
distance, the auras, and therefore all the emotions and most of the
thoughts of the people under observation."

The Astral Tube, in connection with Psychomancy, is used in a variety
of forms. It is often used unconsciously, and springs into existence
spontaneously, under the power of some strong emotion, desire or will.
It is also observed in some cases of hypnotic phenomena, in which the
hypnotist uses his will to cause his subject to form an Astral Tube,
and then report his impressions. It is also used by the trained
Psychomancer, without the use of any "starting point," or "focal
centre," simply by the exercise of his trained, developed and
concentrated will. But its most familiar and common use is in
connection with some object serving as a "starting point," or "focal
centre."

The "starting point" or "focal centre," above mentioned, is generally
either what is known as "the associated object" in the class of
phenomena commonly known as "Psychometry," or else a glass or
crystal-ball, or similar polished reflecting surface, in what is known
as "Crystal Gazing." In the two next succeeding lessons, we shall
consider these two forms of phenomena, respectively.




LESSON V.

PSYCHOMETRY.


The phenomena commonly known as "Psychometry," is but one phase of
Psychomancy--or it even may be said to be but a ~method employed~
to bring into action the Astral Senses. The Psychometrist merely
~gets into rapport~ with the distant scene; or period of time; or
person; or object; by using some bit of physical material associated
with that scene; time; person; objects; etc., in order to "open up
communications" along the usual lines of Psychomancy. This has been
compared to the use of objects associated with a thing in the case of
memory. We all know how the sight of some object will recall at once
memories of things long since forgotten to all appearances, but which
memories have been merely stored away in the great storehouse of the
mind, to be recalled readily when the "association" is furnished. What
"association" is in the case of Memory, so is the material object
presented as the "associated object" in Psychometry.

The Occult Teachings inform us that ~there is a psychic connection
ever existing between things once associated~, and that when we
throw ourselves into the psychic current surrounding an object we may
readily follow the current back until we reach the associated object
for which we are seeking on the Astral Plane. In the Akashic Records
(See Lesson IX) all memories are registered and recorded, and if we
have a good starting point we may travel back until we find that which
we desire. In the same way the "associated object" furnishes us with a
ready means of starting our Astral Tube into being and use. This is the
secret of the use of the lock of hair; the bit of clothing; the piece
of metal or mineral, etc., used by Psychometrists.

A well known authority on the subject has said concerning Psychometry:
"It may be asked how it is possible, amid the bewildering confusion of
these records of the past, to find any particular picture when it is
wanted. As a matter of fact, the untrained psychic usually cannot do so
without some special link to put him in rapport with the subject
required. Psychometry is an instance in point, and it is quite probable
that our ordinary memory is really only another presentment of the same
idea. It seems as though there were a sort of magnetic attachment or
affinity between any particle of matter and the record which contains
its history--and affinity which enables it to act as a kind of
conductor between that record and the faculties of anyone who can read
it. For instance, I once brought from Stonehenge a tiny fragment of
stone, not larger than a pin's head, and on putting this into an
envelope and handing it to a psychometrist who had no idea what it was,
she at once began to describe the wonderful ruin from which it came,
and the desolate country surrounding it, and then went on to picture
vividly what were evidently scenes from its early history, showing that
the infinitesimal fragment had been sufficient to put her into
communication with the records connected with the spot from which it
came. The scenes through which we pass in the course of our life seem
to act in the same manner upon the cells of our brain as did the
history of Stonehenge upon that particle of stone; they establish a
connection with those cells by means of which our mind is put in
rapport with that particular portion of the records, and so we
'remember' what we have seen."


THE FIVE METHODS

The method of Psychometry may be employed in a number of ways, among
which are the following, all of which are subject to many variations
and combinations:

1. Locating a person by means of a lock of hair, article of clothing,
handkerchief, ribbon, piece of jewelry, bit of writing, etc. In this
manner not only may a good Psychometrist locate the person, but will
also be able to give an idea of his characteristics, habits, health,
etc.

2. Describing a person's characteristics, past life, future, etc., by
means of the rapport condition made possible by the person's presence.

3. Describing a present distant scene by means of a bit of mineral,
plant, or similar object once located at the place.

4. Describing the surrounding underground characteristics by means of a
bit of mineral, etc.

5. Getting into touch with the past history of an object, or its
surroundings, by means of the object itself. For instance, a bullet
from the battle-field may give the history of the battle; a bit of
ancient pottery, the characteristics and habits of the people who made
or used it, as well as the appearance of the land in which they dwell,
etc.

In all of these phases, with their variations and combination, the
student will see the operation of the phenomena under the various heads
as classified by us in this work. Each Occurrence or manifestation will
be found to fit into the class of Simple Psychomancy; Space
Psychomancy; Past Time Psychomancy; or Future Time Psychomancy.

(See Lesson II, for suggestions regarding development of Psychometric
power.)




LESSON VI.

CRYSTAL GAZING.


There has been a great revival of interest in the subject of "Crystal
Gazing," particularly in England, of late years, and many interesting
accounts have appeared in the papers and magazines regarding the
results of the experiments. But the majority of the writers on the
subject persist in treating it as a thing separate and apart from other
forms of Psychomancy--in fact, many of them ignore Psychomancy
altogether and are apparently under the impression that there is no
connection between it and their favorite subject of Crystal Gazing.
This attitude is somewhat amusing to persons who have made a careful
study of Psychic Phenomena and who know that Crystal Gazing is not a
distinct phenomenon, but is merely a method of bringing into action the
Psychomantic faculties.

In many respects the Crystal acts in a manner akin to that of the
"associated object" in Psychometry, but there is one point of
distinction which should not be overlooked by the student. The
"associated object" gives to the Psychometrist a ~starting point for
the Astral Tube~, and also serves to "point the Astral Telescope"
(if one may use the term) in the right direction, by reason of its
affinity with the distant scene, etc. But the Crystal does not so act,
for it is not closely allied to, or in sympathy with other things, when
used in the ordinary manner. Instead of being the "eye-lens of the
telescope," it is really a "Magic Mirror" which is turned first this
way and that, and which reflects whatever comes within its field, just
as does any other mirror. The trained and developed Psychomancer,
however, may direct his Mirror to any desired point, and may hold it
there by means of a concentrated Will.

The favor with which Crystal Gazing meets with at the hands of
beginners is due to the fact that it is the easiest method known by
which the Astral Vision may be awakened. With the majority of people,
the power may be awakened only by the aid of some physical object which
may act as a starting-point for the Astral Tube, or as one writer has
expressed it, "a convenient focus for the Will-power." A number of
objects may be so employed, but the Crystal or Glass Ball is the best
for the purpose because of certain atomic and molecular arrangements
which tend to promote the manifestation of the psychic power and
faculties.

Crystal Gazing, as a method for inducing Psychomantic vision, has been
quite common among all peoples, in all times. Not only the Crystal but
many other objects are similarly used. In Australia the native priests
use water and shining objects, or in some cases, flame. In New Zealand
some of the natives use a drop of blood. The Fijians fill a hole with
water, and gaze into it. Some South American tribes use the polished
surface of a black stone. The American Indians used water and shining
bits of flint or quartz. And so the story goes. As Lang states it,
people "stare into a crystal ball; a cup; a mirror; a blot of ink
(Egypt and India); a drop of blood (the Maoris of New Zealand); a bowl
of water (American Indians); a pond (Roman and African); water in a
glass bowl (Fez); or almost any polished surface, etc."

We quote a typical case of Crystal Gazing, related by Mr. Andrew Lang.
He says:

"I had given a glass ball to a young lady, Miss Baillie, who had
scarcely any success with it. She lent it to Miss Leslie, who saw a
large, square, old-fashioned red sofa covered with muslin (which she
afterward found in the next country-house she visited). Miss Baillie's
brother, a young athlete, laughed at these experiments, took the ball
into his study, and came back looking 'gey gash.' He admitted that he
had seen a vision--somebody he knew, under a lamp. He said he would
discover during the week whether he saw right or not. This was at 5:30
on a Sunday afternoon. On Tuesday, Mr. Baillie was at a dance in a town
forty miles from his home, and met a Miss Preston. 'On Sunday,' he
said, 'about half-past five, you were sitting under a standard lamp, in
a dress I never saw you wear, a blue blouse with lace over the
shoulders, pouring out tea for a man in blue serge, whose back was
towards me, so that I only saw the tip of his moustache.' 'Why, the
blinds must have been up,' said Miss Preston. 'I was at Dulby,' said
Mr. Baillie, and he undeniably was."

Stead relates the following experience with the Crystal: "Miss X. upon
looking into the crystal on two occasions as a test, to see if she
could see men when she was several miles off, saw not me, but a
different friend of mine on each occasion. She had never seen either of
my friends before, but immediately identified them both on seeing them
afterward at my office. On one of the evenings on which we experimented
in the vain attempts to photograph a Double, I dined with Madam C. and
her friend at a neighboring restaurant. As she glanced at the water
bottle, Madame C. saw a picture beginning to form, and, looking at it
from curiosity, described with considerable detail an elderly gentleman
whom she had never seen before, and whom I did not in the least
recognize from her description at the moment. Three hours afterwards,
when the seance was over, Madam C. entered the room and recognized Mr.
Elliott, of Messrs. Elliott & Fry, as the gentleman whom she had seen
and described in the water bottle at the restaurant. On another
occasion the picture was less agreeable: it was an old man lying dead
in bed with some one weeping at his feet; but who it was, or what it
related to, no one knew."

As a matter of general interest, we also quote Mr. Stead's remarks on
crystal gazing, which agree with our own views and experience. He says:
"There are some people who cannot look into an ordinary globular bottle
without seeing pictures form themselves, without any effort or will on
their part, in the crystal globe. Crystal gazing seems to be the least
dangerous and most simple of all forms of experimenting. You simply
look into a crystal globe the size of a five-shilling piece, or a water
bottle which is full of clear water, and which is placed so that too
much light does not fall upon it, and then simply look at it. You make
no incantations, and engage in no mumbo-jumbo business; you simply look
at it for two or three minutes, taking care not to tire yourself,
winking as much as you please, but fixing your thought upon whatever
you wish to see. Then, if you have the faculty, the glass will cloud
over with a milky mist, and in the centre the image is gradually
precipitated in just the same way as a photograph forms on the
sensitive plate."

(See Lesson II, for further particulars on Crystal Gazing, and
suggestions for the successful development of the power.)




LESSON VII.

ASTRAL PROJECTION.


In our last three lessons we considered that class of Psychomancy
arising from the erection and employment of the "Astral Tube." In the
present lesson we pass to a consideration of the third class of
phenomena, namely, that occasioned by the actual projection of one's
Astral Body to distant points.

In this class of phenomena the consciousness of the person does not
remain within the physical organism, but is actually projected along
with the Astral Body to the point being psychically viewed or examined.
This form of Psychomancy is, of course, a higher degree of
manifestation than the class previously described. Here physical
consciousness is temporarily suspended (perhaps for but a moment or so)
and the Astral Body containing the consciousness of the individual is
projected to some point, perhaps far distant, with the rapidity of
thought, where it examines objects there situated, receiving sensations
through and by means of the Astral Senses. This phenomena may arise
while the person is in a trance, or sleep, etc., or else in a moment of
concentrated abstraction, when one is "day-dreaming"; in a "brown
study"; or "wrapped in thought," as the familiar terms run. When he
returns to his physical body he "comes to himself," and what he has
seen or heard seems to him like a "day-dream" or fantasy--unless he be
a trained seer, in which case the two planes of consciousness will be
closely related, and almost continuous.

Besides the more familiar phases of this class of phenomena, there are
wonderful possibilities open for the developed Psychomancer along these
lines. As a leading writer on this subject has said concerning it: "He
has also the immense advantage of being able to take part, as it were,
in the scenes which come before his eyes. If, in addition, he can learn
how to materialize himself, he will be able to take part in physical
events or conversations at a distance, and to show himself to an absent
friend at will."

The trained experimenter along these lines has also the advantage of
being able to search about on the Astral Plane for what he desires to
find or locate. He is able to direct his Astral Body to definite
places, either by means similar to finding one's way on the physical
plane, or else by following up the psychic clue afforded by a piece of
clothing, a lock of hair, a piece of stone, or some other object
connected with the person or place desired, by means of a higher form
of Psychometry. Of course, the person whose powers are not so highly
developed is not able to have such control over his Astral Body, or to
manifest such a degree of trained power. He is like a child learning to
walk, or read--he is awkward, and must learn to direct his movements.
There are many degrees of power, from the occasional, spontaneous
manifestations, to those of the highly trained Occultists who travel in
the Astral even more easily than in the physical, and with the same
degree of certainty and control.

The pages of reliable works on Occultism and Psychic Research are
filled with illustrations and examples of cases along these lines, in
which the Astral Body of persons have traveled to distant scenes, and
have reported occurrences and scenes witnessed there, sometimes
materializing so as to be seen by the persons in the places visited. We
herewith mention a few of these cases, in order to illustrate the
principle.

A well-known example is that of the Philadelphian, mentioned by the
German writer Jung Stilling, and quoted by some English writers. The
man in question was a well-known character, respected, of good
reputation and steady habits. He had the reputation of possessing
Psychomantic powers which he sometimes manifested for the benefit of
friends and others. He was once consulted by the wife of a sea captain,
whose husband was on a voyage to Europe and Africa, and whose vessel
had been long overdue, and from whom no tidings had been received for a
long time.

The Psychomancer listened to the story of the anxious and distressed
wife, and then excused himself from the room for a short time, retiring
into an adjoining room. Becoming alarmed at his continued absence from
the room, the lady quietly opened the connecting door, and peeped in
the second room, where much to her surprise and alarm she saw the old
man lying on a couch, showing all the appearances of death. She waited
in great alarm for a long time, when he aroused himself and returned to
her. He told her that he had visited her husband in a coffee-house in
London, and gave her the reasons for his not having written, adding
that he would soon return to Philadelphia.

When the husband finally returned, his wife questioned him regarding
the matter, and he informed her that the reasons given by the
Psychomancer were correct in every detail. Upon being taken into the
presence of the man, the old sea captain uttered an exclamation of
surprise, saying that he had seen the man on a certain day in a
coffee-house in London, and that the man had told him that his wife was
worried about him, and that he had answered the man, saying that he had
been prevented from writing for certain reasons, and that he was on the
very eve of setting sail for America. He said that he had then lost
sight of the stranger suddenly.

W. T. Stead relates the case of a lady of his acquaintance who has
spontaneously developed the power to travel in her Astral Body, and to
materialize the same unconsciously. She became a source of great worry
and distress to many of her friends, to whom she would pay unexpected
and involuntary visits, frightening them out of their wits by the
materialization of what they supposed must be the "ghost" of the lady,
whom they thought must have died suddenly. The occurrences, however,
became so frequent that her friends at last became familiar with the
nature of the appearances, and viewed them with merely great interest
and wonder.

The English Society for Psychical Research have several hundred
well-authenticated instances of such appearances in their published
records. One of the well-known cases is that of a gentleman described
as "S. H. B.," a member of the London Stock Exchange, and a man of
considerable business note. He relates his story as follows:

"One Sunday night in November, 1881, I was in Kildare Gardens, when I
willed very strongly that I would visit in the spirit two lady friends,
the Misses V., who were living three miles off, in Hogarth Road. I
willed that I should do this at one o'clock in the morning, and having
willed it, I went to sleep. Next Thursday, when I first met my friends,
the elder lady told me she woke up and saw my apparition advancing to
her bedside. She screamed and woke her sister, who also saw me." (A
signed statement of the two sisters accompanies this statement, both
ladies fixing the time at one o'clock, and saying that Mr. B. wore
evening dress.)

"Again, on December 1, 1882, I was at Southall. At half-past nine I sat
down to endeavor to fix my mind so strongly upon the interior of a
house at Kew, where Miss V. and her sister lived, that I seemed to be
actually in the house. I was conscious, but was in a kind of mesmeric
sleep. When I went to bed that night, I willed to be in the front
bedroom of that house at Kew at twelve, and to make my presence felt by
the inmates. Next day I went to Kew. Miss V.'s married sister told me,
without any prompting from me, that she had seen me in the passage
going from one room to another at half-past nine o'clock, and that at
twelve, when she was wide awake, she saw me come to the front bedroom,
where she slept, and take her hair, which is very long, into my hand.
She said I then took her hand and gazed into the palm intently. She
said, 'You need not look at the lines, for I never had any trouble.'
She then woke her sister. When Mrs. L. told me this. I took out the
entry that I had made the previous night and read it to her. Mrs. L. is
quite sure she was not dreaming. She had only seen me once before, two
years previously, at a fancy ball."

"Again, on March 22, 1884, I wrote to Mr. Gurney, of the Psychical
Research Society, telling him I was going to make my presence felt by
Miss V., at 44 Norland Square, at midnight. Ten days afterwards, I saw
Miss V., when she voluntarily told me that on Saturday at midnight, she
distinctly saw me, when she was quite wide awake."

We have related these accounts in order to show instances of the
appearance of a materialized Astral Body. But, we must remember that
these cases of materialization are very rare as compared to the cases
of Astral Projection (without materialization) in ordinary
Clairvoyance. And yet the phenomena is practically the same in both
instances, leaving out the phase of materialization. In many instances
the individual actually travels in his Astral Body to the distant scene
and there witnesses the events occurring at that point. There is a
"ghost" within each one of us, which under certain favorable conditions
travels away from our physical body and "sees things" at far-off
points. Under certain other conditions it materializes, and is visible
to others, but in the majority of cases it merely "sees" without being
seen. The Psychomancer, in this phase of the phenomena, actually
travels from the location of the physical body, to the other points
desired, and reports what he or she sees and hears there.

Astral Projection is frequently developed by faithful practice of, and
demonstration of, the simpler forms of Psychomancy. It is all a matter
of successive steps of development.




LESSON VIII.

SPACE PSYCHOMANCY.


As we stated in previous lessons, "Space Psychomancy" is the exercise
of the faculty in the direction of perceiving far-distant scenes,
persons, objects, etc.

Of course, there is really an exercise of Space Psychomancy in some
instances of Simple Psychomancy. But we make the distinction because in
the case of objects seen by Simple Psychomancy at some little distance
from the observer, the impression is received by means of the rays, or
vibrations from the objects themselves, by means of the developed
Astral Senses, acting in a simple manner; while in the case of Space
Psychomancy (in the technical sense of the term) the impression is
received by means of either the erection of the Astral Tube, or else by
the actual projection of the consciousness in the Astral Body--the
latter being an actual visiting of the scene.

A little illustration may perhaps make clearer the above distinction.
Let us suppose a man on the physical Plane with ordinary eyesight--such
a man could not see an object beyond the average distance of vision,
and he would be like a person devoid of Psychomantic powers. Then let
us suppose a man of extraordinary visual powers, such as many hunters
or seafaring men--such a one could see things invisible to the first
man, and would thus resemble the person manifesting Simple Psychomancy.
Then let us suppose a third man, using a telescope--this man could see
things that neither of the other two could perceive, and he would thus
resemble the person manifesting along the lines of Space Psychomancy by
means of the Astral Tube. And, finally, let us suppose a fourth man,
who possessed magical wings which would instantly transport him to the
distant scene, whence he could view the objects, personally, and at
close range--well this man would be like the person who was able to
project his Astral Body, and thus view the distant scenes at will, and
at short range, without the difficulties attendant upon the use of the
telescope-like Astral Tube--to see the object on any and all sides, and
from all points of view--~to get inside of it~, as well as outside.

The following interesting cases are quoted to illustrate the principle:

Captain Yount, of the Napa Valley, California, had a peculiar
experience while asleep. He had a remarkably clear vision in which
appeared a band of emigrants perishing from cold and hunger amidst a
mountain range. He noted particularly, and in detail, the scenery and
appearance of the canyon. He saw a huge, perpendicular cliff of white
rock; and the emigrants cutting off what appeared to be the tops of
trees arising from great drifts of snow; he even saw plainly the
features of some of the party. He awoke, sorely distressed by the
vividness and the nature of his "dream," for so he considered it to be.
But, by-and-by, he fell asleep again, and saw the scene repeated, with
equal distinctness. In the morning he found that he could not get the
"dream" out of his mind, and he told it to some of his friends. One of
the hearers of the story was an old hunter, who at once recognized the
place seen in the dream as a place across the Sierras, known as a point
in the Carson Valley Pass. So earnest was the old hunter, that Captain
Yount, and his friends, organized a rescue party and set out with
provisions, mules, and blankets to seek the perishing emigrants.
Notwithstanding the ridicule of the public, the rescuers persisted in
their search, and finally about one hundred and fifty miles distant, in
the Carson Valley Pass, they found the scene as described by Captain
Yount, and ~in the identical spot seen in the dream were found the
party of emigrants~, the surviving members of whom were rescued and
brought over the mountain.

Another interesting account is given in the reports of the Society for
Psychical Research, of England. It relates that an English lady, Mrs.
Broughton, awoke one night in 1844, and aroused her husband, telling
him that she had had a strange vision of a scene in France. She stated
that she had seen a broken-down carriage, evidently wrecked in an
accident, and a crowd gathered around the figure of a man, whose body
was then raised and carried into a nearby house. She said that the body
was then placed in a bed, when she recognized his features as those of
the Duke of Orleans. Then friends gathered around the bed, and later
came the king and queen of France, all weeping. She saw the doctor, who
stood over the Duke, feeling his pulse, with his watch in his other
hand, but she could only see the doctor's back. Then the scene had
faded from her vision. When daylight finally came, she recorded the
vision in her journal. It was before the days of the telegraph, and it
was more than two days before the newspapers announced the death of the
Duke of Orleans. The lady visited Paris afterwards, and recognized the
place of the accident. It then appeared that the attending physician
whose face she could not see in her vision, was an old friend of hers,
who then told her that as he watched the bed his mind had involuntarily
dwelt upon her and her family.

The well-known case of Swedenborg gives us another illustration of this
class of Psychomancy. It is related that in the latter part of
September, 1759, at four o'clock one Saturday afternoon, Swedenborg
arrived home from England, and disembarked at Gothenburg. Mr. W. Castel
met him and invited him to dinner, at which meal there were fifteen
persons gathered around the table. At six o'clock that evening
Swedenborg went out a few minutes, returning to the table excited and
pale. When questioned, he said that there was a fire at Stockholm, 200
miles distant, which was steadily spreading. He grew very restless, and
frequently left the room. He said that the house of one of his friends,
whose name he mentioned, was already in ashes, and that his own was in
danger. At eight o'clock after he had been out again, he returned
crying out cheerfully, "Thank heaven! the fire is out, the third door
from my house."

The news of the occurrence excited the whole town, and the officials
made inquiry regarding it, and Swedenborg was summoned before the
governor, and requested to relate what he had seen, in detail.
Answering the governor, he told when and where the fire had started;
how it had begun; how, when and where it had stopped; and the time it
lasted, the number of houses destroyed, people injured, etc. On the
following Monday morning a courier arrived from Stockholm, bringing
news of the fire, having left the town while it was still burning. On
the next day after, Tuesday morning, another courier arrived at the
governor's palace with a full report of the fire, which corresponded
precisely with the vision of Swedenborg--the fire had stopped precisely
at eight o'clock, the minute that Swedenborg had so announced it to the
company.

Stead relates the following instance of this class of Psychomancy,
which was told him by the wife of a Dean of the Episcopal Church. The
lady said: "I was staying in Virginia, some hundred miles away from
home, when one morning about eleven o'clock, I felt an overpowering
sleepiness, which drowsiness was quite unusual, and which caused me to
lie down. In my sleep I saw quite distinctly my home in Richmond in
flames. The fire had broken out in one wing of the house, which I saw
with dismay was where I kept all my best dresses. The people were all
trying to check the flames, but it was no use. My husband was there,
walking about before the burning house, carrying a portrait in his
hand. Everything was quite clear and distinct, exactly as if I had
actually been present and seen everything. After a time I woke up, and
going downstairs told my friends the strange dream I had had. They
laughed at me, and made such game of my vision that I did my best to
think no more about it. I was traveling about, a day or two passed, and
when Sunday came I found myself in a church where some relatives were
worshipping. When I entered the pew they looked rather strange, and as
soon as the service was over I asked them what was the matter. 'Don't
be alarmed,' they said 'there is nothing serious.' Then they handed me
a postcard from my husband which simply said, 'House burned out;
covered by insurance.' ~The day was the date upon which my dream
occurred.~ I hastened home, and then I learned that everything had
happened exactly as I had seen it. The fire had broken out in the wing
I had seen blazing. My clothes were all burnt, and the oddest thing
about it was that my husband, having rescued a favorite picture from
the burning building, had carried it about among the crowd for some
time before he could find a place in which to put it safely."

A well-authenticated case is that of the wreck of the ship
"Strathmore." Stead relates the story as follows: "The father of a son
who had sailed in the 'Strathmore,' an emigrant ship outbound from
Clyde, saw one night the ship foundering amid the waves, and saw that
his son, with some others had escaped safely to a desert island near
which the wreck had taken place. He was so much impressed by this
vision that he wrote to the owner of the 'Strathmore,' telling him what
he had seen. His information was scouted; but after a while the
'Strathmore' became overdue, and the owner became uneasy. Day followed
day, and still no tidings of the missing ship. Then, like Pharaoh's
butler, the owner remembered his sins one day, and hunted up the letter
describing the vision. It supplied at least a theory to account for the
vessel's disappearance. All outward-bound ships were requested to look
out for any survivors on the island indicated in the vision. These
orders being obeyed, the survivors of the 'Strathmore' were found
exactly where the father had seen them."

Another interesting case is reported by the Society previously
mentioned. It reports that Dr. Golinski, a physician of Kremeutchug,
Russia, was taking an after-dinner nap in the afternoon, about
half-past three o'clock. He had a vision in which he saw himself called
out on a professional visit, which took him to a little room with dark
hangings. To the right of the door he saw a chest of drawers, upon
which rested a little paraffin lamp of special pattern, different from
anything he had ever seen before. On the left of the door, he saw a
woman suffering from a severe hemorrhage. He then saw himself giving
her professional treatment. Then he awoke, suddenly, and saw that it
was just half-past four o'clock. Then comes the strange sequel. Within
ten minutes after he awoke, he was called out on a professional visit,
and on entering the bedroom he saw all the details that had appeared to
him in his vision. There was the chest of drawers--there was the
peculiar lamp--there was the woman on the bed suffering from the
hemorrhage. Upon inquiry he found that she had grown worse between
three and four o'clock, and had anxiously desired that he come to her
about that time, finally dispatching a messenger for him at half-past
four, the moment at which he awoke.

We could fill page after page with these interesting and
well-authenticated instances, but our lack of space prevents. We have
stated enough to illustrate the principle, and then, besides, many of
our readers will know of many similar instances in the actual
experience of themselves, relatives or friends. Volumes would not
contain all the true stories of phenomena of this kind--and still
people smile in a superior way at the mere suggestion of the phenomena.




LESSON IX.

PAST TIME PSYCHOMANCY.


As we have previously stated, "Time Psychomancy" is a term used to
designate that phase of the phenomena in which one senses objects,
events, persons, etc., in the records of the past; and also in which he
senses the indications of the future--"the shadows of coming events."

For convenience, we shall separate our consideration of the subject
into two parts, viz.: (1) Past Time Psychomancy; and (2) Future Time
Psychomancy.

Past Time Psychomancy is that phase of the phenomena which enables one
to use his Astral Vision to explore the records of the past, and we
shall now proceed to examine.

The first question that naturally arises in the minds of careful
students, in connection with this phase of the phenomena, is, "How is
the person able to sense the scenes, occurrences, and objects of the
past? There are no vibrations emanating from past scenes, and as they
no longer exist, how can anyone see them, by Astral Vision, or by any
other means?" This question is a most proper one, for even those who
readily grasp the explanation of Space Psychomancy find themselves at a
loss to understand the Past Time Phenomena without a knowledge of the
Occult Teachings on the subjects.


THE AKASHIC RECORDS

The secret of Past Time Psychomancy is found in the Occult Teachings of
the "Akashic Records" by which is meant that on the higher planes of
Universal Substance, there are to be found records of all that has
happened and occurred during the entire World Cycle of which the
present time forms a part. These records are preserved until the
termination of the World Cycle, when they pass away with the World of
which they are a record. This does not mean that there is any Great
Book in which the doings, good and bad, of people are written down by
the Recording Angel, as popular fanciful legends have it. But it does
mean that there is a scientific occult basis for the popular legend, in
spite of the sneers of the skeptics. We must turn to modern science for
a corroboration. It is now taught by scientists that there is no such
thing as a destruction of Energy, but that Energy always exists in some
form. The Occult Teachings verify this, and go further, when they state
that every action, thought, happening, event, occurrence, etc., no
matter how small or insignificant, leaves an indelible record on the
Akasha (or Universal Ether) with which Space is filled. In other words,
every action, or scene, that has ever occurred or existed in the past,
has left an impression in the Universal Ether, or Akasha, where it may
be read by developed Psychomancy.

There is nothing especially wonderful about this, when you compare it
with other facts in nature. Astronomy teaches us that light travels at
the rate of 186,000 miles a second--and that there are fixed stars in
space so far removed from the Earth that their light leaving them
hundreds, yes, thousands, of years ago, is only now reaching our sight.
In other words, when we look at some of the fixed stars, we do not see
them as they now are, or where they now are, but merely see them where
and how they were hundreds of years ago when the rays of light left
them. Astronomers tell us that if one of these stars happened to be
blotted out of existence hundreds of years ago, we would be still
seeing the light that left them before the event--in other words would
be seeing them hundreds of years after they had ceased to be. And our
children, and children's children, for several generations would still
see them, and would not learn of the terrible catastrophe for hundreds
of years after it actually happened. The vibrations of light once set
into motion would persist for centuries, and even for thousands of
years after their source had disappeared. This is no wild occult fancy,
but a well-proven and thoroughly-established scientific fact, as any
one may see for himself by reference to any work on astronomy. And the
same is true of waves of electricity, or electronic emanations, or
waves of any kind of energy. Really, even in the physical view of
things, nothing can exist without leaving a record in the Universal
Ether. And so the Occult Teachings now find their corroboration in
Modern Science.

Another illustration is found in the phenomena of the Memory of Man.
Stored away in our brain cells are records of things, events, scenes,
occurrences, people, and objects, registered there in past years. You
often find yourself thinking about people, things and events of years
long since passed away--and by a mere effort of the will you bring the
records of these people, things, or events before your mental vision
and see them reproduced in detail. Dissect a brain-cell and you will
find no trace of the thing there--but nevertheless every exercise of
memory proves that the record is there. And there is nothing more
wonderful, or miraculous, in the Akashic Records of Past Events, than
there is in the Memory Record of Past Events! The Universal Ether, or
Akasha, has within itself a true and full record of anything, and
everything, that has ever existed within its space. And if one develops
the power to read these records at will, he has a full and complete key
to the past, from the speaking of the Creative Word which began this
great World Cycle.

But, in order to avoid a misapprehension, we must say to our students
that none but the most advanced and highly-developed Occultists and
Masters have clear access to the planes upon which these records are to
be found. The majority of Psychomancers merely see on the "Lower Astral
Plane" a reflection of the Akashic Records, which reflection may be
compared to the reflection of the trees and landscape in a pond of
water, which of course, is often more or less imperfect--distorted and
disturbed by the ripples and waves occasioned by the passing breezes,
and sometimes being made muddy and clouded. The records of the Past,
open to the average Psychomancer, are merely "~reflections of
records~," which are apt to be more or less distorted, or cloudy, by
reason of the disturbances of the surface of the reflecting medium.
This is a brief and simple statement of an important Occult scientific
truth, which would require volumes to explain technically. The
illustration of the reflecting surface of the water, however, is so
true to the real facts that the student may confidently adopt the same
as his mental image of the phenomena of Past Time Psychomancy.

In actual practice we find the phenomena of Past Time Psychomancy
manifested principally along the line of Psychometry and Crystal
Gazing, the consideration of which phases of phenomena has been made in
previous lessons in this book. There are to be found, however, many
instances of at least a partial manifestation of this phase of power
among individuals in every-day life, who when meeting a person
frequently get impressions (more or less correct) of his or her past
life, past scenes, etc.

The German writer, Zschokke, in his autobiography, writes as follows
regarding this power of Past Time Psychomancy possessed by him, and
which was often set into operation when he came into the presence of
strangers for the first time. He states: "It has happened to me
sometimes, on my first meeting with strangers, as I silently listened
to their discourse, that their former life, with many trifling
circumstances therewith connected, or frequently some particular scene
in that life, has passed quite involuntarily, and, as it were,
dream-like, yet perfectly distinct, before me. During this time I
usually feel so entirely absorbed in the contemplation of the
stranger's life, that at last I no longer see clearly the face of the
unknown wherein I undesignedly read, nor distinctly hear the voices of
the speakers, which before served in some measure as a commentary on
the text of their features. For a long time I held such visions as
delusions of the fancy, and the more so as they showed me even the
dress and emotions of the actors, rooms, furniture, and other
accessories, but I soon discovered otherwise.

"On one occasion, in a gay mood, I narrated to my family the secret
history of a seamstress who had just before quitted the room. I had
never seen the young woman before. Nevertheless, the hearers were
astonished and laughed, and would not be persuaded but that I had a
previous acquaintance with her and the facts of her former life,
inasmuch as what I had stated was perfectly true. I was not the less
astonished than they to find that my vision agreed with reality."

"I then gave more attention to the subject, and as often as propriety
allowed of it, I related to those whose lives had passed before me, the
substance of my visions, in order to obtain from them a contradiction
or verification thereof. On every occasion the confirmation followed,
not without amazement on the part of those who gave it."

"One day, in the city of Waldshut, I entered an inn (the Vine) in
company with two young students. We supped with a numerous company at
the table d'hote, where the guests were making very merry with the
peculiarities of the Swiss, with Mesmer's magnetism, Lavater's
physiognomy, etc. One of my companions, whose national pride was
wounded by their mockery, begged me to make some reply, particularly to
a handsome young man who sat opposite to us, and who had allowed
himself extraordinary license. This man's life was at that moment
presented to my mind. I turned to him, and asked whether he would
answer me candidly if I related to him some of the most secret passages
of his life, I knowing as little of him personally as he did of me. He
promised, if I were correct, to admit it frankly. I then related what
my vision had shown me, and the whole company were made acquainted with
the private history of the young merchant--his school years, his
youthful errors, and, lastly, with a fault committed in reference to
the strong-box of his principal. I described the uninhabited room with
whitened walls, where, to the right of the brown door, on a table,
stood a black money-box, etc. A dead silence prevailed during the whole
narrative, which I alone occasionally interrupted by inquiring whether
I spoke the truth. The startled young man confirmed every particular,
and even, what I had scarcely expected, the last mentioned. Touched by
his candor, I shook hands with him, and said no more. He is, probably,
still living."




LESSON X.

FUTURE TIME PSYCHOMANCY.


"Future Time Psychomancy," as the term itself indicates, is the name
given to that class of phenomena in which one is able to sense the
Astral Plane impression of coming events--the psychic shadows thrown
before by coming events. In order to give the student a technical
nature of the occult cause behind this phenomena would require volumes
of the deepest metaphysical lore, which field is foreign to the
purposes of this work which deals with phenomena alone, and does not
enter into the metaphysical side of the subject.

It will be sufficient for the student to understand that in the Astral
as well as on the Physical Plane, "~Coming Events cast their Shadows
Before~." Without entering into a discussion of Destiny or Fate, or
anything of that kind, it may be stated that ~when Causes are set
into motion, the Effects follow~, unless other Causes intervene. In
some cases certain effects have been averted by reason of the previous
Vision--in such cases ~the other Causes intervened~, which showed
that the matter was not wholly "cut and dried." It is like a man
walking toward a precipice--he will walk over unless he is warned in
some way. He is not "fated" to walk over but over he will go, unless
warned and prevented. Do you see what we mean?

On the other hand, there seem to be cases in which the person seems
unable to escape the Effect of Causes once set into motion--he even
seems to run into the effect, while seeking to escape it. In this
connection the little fable of the Persians may be quoted. The story
goes that a friend was with Solomon when the Angel of Death entered and
gazed at him fixedly. Upon learning who the strange visitor was, the
friend said to Solomon, "Pray transport me on thy magic carpet to
Damascus, that I may escape this dread messenger." And Solomon complied
with his request, and the man was instantly magically transported to
Damascus. Then said the Angel of Death to Solomon: "O Solomon, the
reason that I gazed so intently at thy friend was because I had orders
from On High to take him from the body at Damascus, and lo! finding him
here at Jerusalem, I was sore perplexed as to how to obey my orders.
But, thou, by transporting him to Damascus hath rendered my task an
easy one. Many thanks, for thy help at thy friend's suggestion, O
King!" And saying which the Angel of Death was wafted away to Damascus
to take the man, according to orders.

The phenomena of Premonitions, Prevision, and Second Sight, are all
forms or phases of Future Time Psychomancy. In these various forms the
phenomena is of quite common and frequent occurrence, and is met with
all over the world. In the Isle of Skye many persons possess the gift
of Second Sight in varying degree, but they claim that a native of the
island loses the power when he moves to the mainland. In the same way
the Scotch Highlander (among whose people the gift is quite common) is
said to sometimes lose the faculty when he removes to the lowlands. The
Westphalian peasants also are noted for the power of Second Sight.

An instance of this phase of the phenomena, well known in England, is
that connected with the assassination of Mr. Percival in the lobby of
the House of Commons. This deed was foreseen by John Williams, a
Cornish mine manager, some nine days before its actual occurrence, the
vision being perfect down to the most minute details. Williams had the
vision three times in succession. He saw a small man, dressed in a blue
coat and white waistcoat, enter the lobby of the House of Commons, when
another person, dressed in a snuff-colored coat, stepped forward and
drawing a pistol from an inside pocket fired at and shot the little
man, the bullet lodging in the left breast. He seemed to ask some
bystander who was the victim, and he received the reply that it was Mr.
Percival, the Chancellor of the Exchequer. Williams was so much wrought
up over the vision, that he seriously contemplated going to London to
warn the victim, but his friends, to whom he told the story, ridiculed
him and persuaded him not to go on "a fool's errand." A few days later
the news was received of the assassination of Mr. Percival, in
precisely the manner indicated by the vision.

George Fox the Quaker, experienced the impression of "a waft of death"
about Cromwell when he met him riding at Hampton Court, shortly before
his fatal illness. Fox also foretold the expulsion of the "Rump
Parliament;" the restoration of Charles II; and the Fire of London.
Caesar's wife had a warning of her husband's death. The Bible is filled
with similar instances.

We will conclude this lesson with a recital of the wonderful instance
of Cazotte, whose prediction, and its literal fulfillment, are now
matters of French history. La Harpe tells the story as follows:

"It appears but as yesterday, and yet, nevertheless, it was at the
beginning of the year 1788. We were dining with one of our brethren at
the Academy--a man of considerable wealth and genius. The conversation
became serious; much admiration was expressed on the revolution in
thought which Voltaire had effected, and it was agreed that it was his
first claim to the reputation he enjoyed. We concluded that the
revolution must soon be consummated; that it was indispensable that
superstition and fanaticism should give place to philosophy, and we
began to calculate the probability of the period when this should be,
and which of the present company should live to see it. The oldest
complained that they could scarcely flatter themselves with the hope;
the younger rejoiced that they might entertain this very probable
expectation; and they congratulated the Academy especially for having
prepared this great work, and for having been the great rallying point,
the centre, and the prime mover of the liberty of thought.

"One only of the guests had not taken part in all the joyousness of
this conversation, and had even gently and cheerfully checked our
splendid enthusiasm. This was Cazotte, an amiable and original man, but
unhappily infatuated with the reveries of the illuminati. He spoke, and
with the most serious tone. 'Gentlemen,' said he, 'be satisfied; you
will all see this great and sublime revolution, which you so much
desire. You know that I am a little inclined to prophesy; I repeat, you
will see it.' He was answered by the common rejoinder: 'One need not be
a conjuror to see that.' 'Be it so; but perhaps one must be a little
more than conjuror for what remains for me to tell you. Do you know
what will be the consequence of this revolution--what will be the
consequence to all of you, and what will be the immediate result--the
well-established effect--the thoroughly-recognized consequence to all
of you who are here present?' 'Ah!' said Condorcet, with his insolent
and half-suppressed smile, 'let us hear--a philosopher is not sorry to
encounter a prophet.' 'You, Monsieur de Condorcet--you will yield up
your last breath on the floor of a dungeon; you will die from poison,
which you will have taken, in order to escape from execution--from
poison which the happiness of that time will oblige you to carry about
your person.'

"'Monsieur de Chamfort, you will open your veins with twenty-two cuts
of a razor, and yet you will not die until some months afterward.' They
looked at each other, and laughed again. 'You, Monsieur Vicq d'Azir,
you will not open your own veins, but you will cause yourself to be
bled six times in one day, during a parozysm of the gout, in order to
make more sure of your end, and you will die in the night. You,
Monsieur de Nicolai, you will die upon the scaffold; you, Monsieur
Bailly, on the scaffold; you, Monsieur de Malesherbes, on the
scaffold.' 'Ah! God be thanked,' exclaimed Roucher, 'and what of I?'
'You! you also will die upon the scaffold.' 'Yes,' replied Chamfort,
'but when will all this happen?' 'Six years will not pass over, before
all that I have said to you shall be accomplished.'

"'Here are some astonishing miracles (and, this time, it was I myself
(La Harpe) who spoke), but you have not included me in your list.' 'But
you will be there, as an equally extraordinary miracle; you will then
be a Christian.' Vehement exclamations on all sides. 'Ah,' replied
Chamfort, 'I am comforted; if we shall perish only when La Harpe shall
be a Christian, we are immortal.'

"'As for that,' then observed Madame la Duchesse de Grammont, 'we
women, we are happy to be counted for nothing in these revolutions:
when I say for nothing, it is not that we do not always mix ourselves
up with them a little; but it is a received maxim that they take no
notice of us, and of our sex.' 'Your sex, ladies, will not protect you
this time; and you had far better meddle with nothing, for you will be
treated entirely as men, without any difference whatever.' 'But what,
then, are you really telling us of, Monsieur Cazotte? You are preaching
to us the end of the world.' 'I know nothing on this subject; but what
I do know is, that you, Madame la Duchesse, will be conducted to the
scaffold, you and many other ladies with you, in the cart of the
executioner, and with your hands tied behind your backs.' 'Ah! I hope
that, in that case, I shall at least have a carriage hung in black.'
'No, madame; higher ladies than yourself will go, like you, in the
common car, with their hands tied behind them.' 'Higher ladies! what!
the princesses of the blood?' 'Still more exalted personages.' Here a
sensible emotion pervaded the whole company, and the countenance of the
host was dark and lowering; they began to feel that the joke was become
too serious.

"Madame de Grammont, in order to dissipate the cloud, took no notice of
the reply, and contented herself with saying in a careless tone: 'You
see that he will not leave me even a confessor!' 'No, madame, you will
not have one--neither you, nor any one besides. The last victim to whom
this favor will be afforded will be----' He stopped for a moment.
'Well! who then will be the happy mortal to whom this prerogative will
be given?' ''Tis the only one which he will have then retained--and
that will be the king of France.'"

The amazing sequel to this historical prediction is that ~it was
verified in every detail~, as all students of the French Revolution
know--~and all within the six years~, as Cazotte foretold.




LESSON XI.

DREAM PSYCHOMANCY.


The Student will have noted that in many cases mentioned in these
lessons, the Psychomantic vision manifested during physical sleep. The
reason of this occurrence is that in the majority of persons the
physical nature, when awake, holds the attention of the individual to
such an extent as to prevent him from manifesting the psychic faculties
clearly. But when the physical body sinks into sleep then the field is
clear for the exercise of the Astral Senses, which not being fatigued,
are in fine condition to manifest. In fact the majority of persons do
manifest Psychomancy during sleep, but have little or no recollection
of the same when waking, beyond indistinct recollections of "dreams,"
etc. Still, many of you who read these lines will have a more or less
clear remembrance of certain "dreams" in which you seemed to visit
other places, scenes, lands, countries, etc., seeing strange faces,
land-scapes, etc., and upon awakening were somewhat annoyed at having
been brought back from your pleasant travels.

It is not our intention to enter into an extended consideration of the
general subject of Dreams, at this time and place. We write these few
lines merely for the purpose of calling your attention to the fact that
the phenomena of Psychomancy very frequently manifests itself in
dreams, for the reasons stated above. The principle in both the waking
and dream phenomena is precisely the same, the apparent difference
being that the dreamer very seldom carries back with him a clear and
connected memory of his vision, while the waking person is able to
impress his Astral vision upon a wide-awake physical brain, there to be
remembered.

You will find several instances of Dream Psychomancy recorded in the
various lessons of this work, inserted for the purpose of illustrating
the several phases of the phenomena. In such cases we have made no
distinction between the Psychomantic phenomena experienced in dreams on
the one hand, and that experienced in the waking state on the other
hand. The principle is the same in both cases, and there is no
necessity for making any such distinction between the phenomena
occurring under any of the several general classes. But as we still
have to spare a few pages of the space allotted to us in the
preparation of these lessons, we think that we should give you a few
more of the many interesting cases of record.

A well-known and interesting case is that mentioned in the Proceedings
of the Psychical Research Society, of London. It is related as follows:

On September 9th, 1848, at the siege of Mooltan, Major-General R. was
most severely and dangerously wounded; and, supposing himself to be
dying, asked one of the officers with him to take the ring off his
finger and send it to his wife, who at the time was fully 150 miles
distant at Ferozepore.

"On the night of September 9th, 1848," writes his wife, "I was lying on
my bed, between sleeping and waking, when I distinctly saw my husband
being carried off the field seriously wounded, and heard his voice,
saying, 'Take this ring off my finger and send it to my wife.' All the
next day I could not get the sight or the voice out of my mind. In due
time I heard of General R. having been seriously wounded in the assault
of Mooltan. He survived, however, and is still living. It was not for
some time after the siege that I heard from General L., the officer who
helped to carry my husband off the field, that the request as to the
ring was actually made by him, just as I heard it at Ferozepore at that
very time."

The following, related by Mrs. Crowe, is interesting, particularly in
its aspect as a warning:

"A few years ago, Dr. Watson, now residing at Glasgow, dreamt that he
received a summons to attend a patient at a place some miles from where
he was living; that he started on horseback, and that as he was
crossing a moor, he saw a bull making furiously at him, whose horns he
escaped only by taking refuge on a spot inaccessible to the animal,
where he waited a long time till some people, observing his situation,
came to his assistance and released him. While at breakfast the
following morning the summons came, and smiling at the odd co-incidence
(as he thought it), he started on horseback. He was quite ignorant of
the road he had to go, but by and by he arrived at the moor, which he
recognized, and presently the bull appeared, coming full tilt towards
him. But his dream had shown him the place of refuge, for which he
instantly made, and there he spent three or four hours besieged by the
animal, till the country people set him free. Dr. Watson declared that
but for the dream he should not have known in what direction to run for
safety."

This case is an instance of Future Time Psychomancy, as the student
will readily see. Here is another case coming under the same
classification. It is related by Dr. Lee:

Mrs. Hannah Green, the housekeeper of a country family in Oxfordshire,
dreamt one night that she had been left alone in the house on a Sunday
evening, and that hearing a knock at the door of the chief entrance,
she went to it and found confronting her an ugly tramp, armed with a
big club, who forced himself into the house in spite of her struggles,
striking her insensible with his club during the conflict. She awoke at
this point. A considerable period of time elapsed, and she had almost
forgotten her dream until it was recalled in a startling manner. She
was then in charge of an isolated mansion at Kensington, and on a
Sunday afternoon, when the servants had taken a holiday, leaving her
alone, she was startled by a loud knock at the door. At once the memory
of her dream flashed before her with singular vividness and remarkable
force. She knew that she was alone, but for the purpose of frightening
away the intruder she lighted a lamp on the hall table, and afterward
in other places in the house, and also rang the bells violently in
different parts of the house. She also made sure that the doors and
windows were fastened. She succeeded in scaring off the man, by making
him believe that the house was occupied by the family, or several
people at least, but not until she had thrown up the window over the
stair landing, and there to her intense terror saw the identical man of
her dream, armed with the same club, and demanding an entrance. Had she
not been warned by the dream of several years previous, she would have
met with a fate such as she had dreamed of.

The following case of Dream Psychomancy, which is a good example of
Astral Projection during sleep, is related by a correspondent of the
Psychical Research Society, as follows:

"One morning in December, 1836, he had the following dream, or, he
would prefer to call it, revelation. He found himself suddenly at the
gate of Major N. M.'s avenue, many miles from his home. Close to him
was a group of persons, one of whom was a woman with a basket on her
arm, the rest men, four of whom were tenants of his own, while the
others were unknown to him. Some of the strangers seemed to be
assaulting H. W., one of his tenants, and he interfered. 'I struck
violently at the man on my left, and then with greater violence at the
man's face on my right. Finding, to my surprise, that I had not knocked
down either, I struck again and again with all the violence of a man
frenzied at the sight of my poor friend's murder. To my great amazement
I saw my arms, although visible to my eye, were without substance, and
the bodies of the men I struck at and my own came close together after
each blow through the shadowy arms I struck with. My blows were
delivered with more extreme violence than I ever think I exerted, but I
became painfully convinced of my incompetency. I have no consciousness
of what happened after this feeling of unsubstantiality came upon me.'
Next morning A. experienced the stiffness and soreness of violent
bodily exercise, and was informed by his wife that in the course of the
night he had much alarmed her by striking out again and again with his
arms in a terrific manner, 'as if fighting for his life.' He, in turn,
informed her of his dream, and begged her to remember the names of
those actors in it who were known to him. On the morning of the
following day (Wednesday) A. received a letter from his agent, who
resided in the town close to the scene of the dream, informing that his
tenant had been found on Tuesday morning at Major N. M.'s gate,
speechless and apparently dying from a fracture of the skull, and that
there was no trace of the murderers. That night A. started for the
town, and arrived there on Thursday morning. On his way to a meeting of
magistrates he met the senior magistrate of that part of the country,
and requested him to give orders for the arrest of the three men whom,
besides H. W., he had recognized in his dream, and to have them
examined separately. This was at once done. The three men gave
identical accounts of the occurrence, and all named the woman who was
with them. She was then arrested, and gave precisely similar testimony.
They said that between eleven and twelve on the Monday night they had
been walking homewards altogether along the road, when they were
overtaken by three strangers, two of whom savagely assaulted H. W.,
while the other prevented his friends from interfering. H. W. did not
die, but was never the same man afterwards; he subsequently emigrated."

Stead relates the following case, which was imparted to him as a
truthful and correct account of the vision of a murder seen in all of
its details by a brother of the murdered man. It is a case of Astral
Projection, undoubtedly:

"St. Eglos is situated about ten miles from the Atlantic, and not quite
so far from the old market town of Trebodwina. Hart and George Northey
were brothers, and from childhood their lives had been marked by the
strongest brotherly affection. Hart and George Northey had never been
separated from their birth until George became a sailor, Hart meantime
joining his father in business. On the 8th of February, 1840, while
George Northey's ship was lying in port at St. Helena, he had the
following strange dream:

"'Last night I dreamt my brother was at Trebodwina Market, and that I
was with him, quite close by his side, during the whole of the market
transactions. Although I could see and hear everything which passed
around me, I felt sure that it was not my bodily presence which thus
accompanied him, but my shadow, or rather my spiritual presence, for he
seemed quite unconscious that I was near him. I felt that my being thus
present in this strange way betokened some hidden danger which he was
destined to meet, and which I knew my presence could not avert, for I
could not speak to warn him of his peril.'"

The brother having collected considerable money then started on his
ride homeward. The story then continues:

"'My terror gradually increased as Hart approached the hamlet of
Polkerrow, until I was in a perfect frenzy, frantically desirous, yet
unable, to warn my brother in some way and prevent him going further. I
suddenly became aware of two dark shadows thrown across the road. I
felt my brother's hour had come, and I was powerless to aid him! Two
men appeared, whom I instantly recognized as notorious poachers, who
lived in a lonely wood near St. Eglos. The men wished him "Good-night,
maister," civilly enough. He replied, and entered into conversation
with them about some work he had promised them. After a few minutes
they asked him for some money. The elder of the two brothers, who was
standing near the horse's head, said, "Mr. Northey, we know you have
just come from Trebodwina market with plenty of money in your pockets;
we are desperate men, and you bean't going to leave this place until
we've got that money, so hand over." My brother made no reply, except
to slash at him with the whip and spur the horse at him.

"'The younger of the ruffians instantly drew a pistol and fired. Hart
dropped lifeless from the saddle, and one of the villains held him by
the throat with a grip of iron for some minutes, as though to make
assurance doubly sure, and crush out any particle of life my poor
brother might have left. The murderers secured the horse to a tree in
the orchard, and, having rifled the corpse, they dragged it up the
stream, concealing it under the overhanging banks of the water-course.
They then carefully covered over all marks of blood on the road, and
hid the pistol in the thatch of a disused hut close to the roadside;
then, setting the horse free to gallop home alone, they decamped across
the country to their own cottage.'

"The vessel left St. Helena next day, and reached Plymouth in due
course. George Northey had during the whole of the voyage home, never
altered his conviction that Hart had been killed as he had dreamt, and
that retribution was by his means to fall on the murderers."

The sequel shows that the murder was actually committed in precisely
the manner in which it had appeared to the brother in the dream. The
crime aroused universal horror and indignation, and every effort was
made to discover the murderers and bring them to justice. Two brothers
named Hightwood were suspected, and a search of their cottage revealed
bloodstained garments, but no trace of the pistol was to be found,
although the younger brother admitted having had one and lost it. The
story continues:

"Both brothers were arrested and brought before the magistrates. The
evidence against them was certainly not strong, but their manner seemed
that of guilty men. They were ordered to take their trial at the
forthcoming assizes at Trebodwina. They each confessed in the hope of
saving their lives, and both were sentenced to be hanged. There was,
however, some doubt about the pistol. Before the execution George
Northey arrived from St. Helena, and declared that the pistol was in
the thatch of the old cottage close by the place where they murdered
Hart Northey, and where they hid it. 'How did you know?' he was asked.
George Northey replied: 'I saw the foul deed committed in a dream I had
the night of the murder, when at St. Helena.' A pistol was found, as
George Northey had predicted, in the thatch of the ruined cottage."

We trust that we have established the identity of Waking Psychomancy,
and Dream Psychomancy, to your satisfaction.


FINIS.




Practical Mind Reading

By William Walker Atkinson

_A course of Lessons on Thought Transference, Telepathy, Mental
Currents, Mental Rapport, etc._


This book is full of practical condensed instruction about every phase
of Mind Reading, Telepathy, etc. The exercises and directions are so
plain and simple that they can be understood and demonstrated by any
person of ordinary intelligence.

Here you will find complete instruction in all the latest points about
Mind Reading. It tells how Thought Transference is practiced in the
scientific laboratory as well as by a public performer. It tells you
how to perform feats that will mystify an audience and arouse the
deepest interest and enthusiasm, or you can conduct Telepathic
experiments with your friends right in your own home.

Here are the titles of the lessons and a few of the subjects treated:

    ~The Nature of Mind Reading~--A vast, mysterious subject. Power of
    Etheric Vibrations; Mental wireless telepathy; the mysteries of
    science; Action of mind upon mind; The mental battery.

    ~The Proofs of Mind Reading~--The Psychic post office: Wonderful
    results; A convincing experiment.

    ~Contact Mind Reading~--The two classes of mind reading: The
    simplest form; Nerve current theory; The truth about public
    performances.

    ~Development Exercises~--How to begin; Rapport
    conditions--Rhythmic breathing; Details of finding objects.

No. 8--95 Pages, Paper Bound, Size 6×4-1/2




THE HUMAN AURA

Astral Colors and Thought Forms

by

SWAMI PANCHADASI


Contents

    CHAPTER I.--What is the Human Aura.

    The human aura is a very important and interesting phase of every
    personality.

    CHAPTER II.--The Prana Aura.

    How it affects the human aura. Interesting experiments.

    CHAPTER III.--The Astral Colors.

    Each mental or emotional state has its own astral hue.

    CHAPTER IV.--The Astral colors interpreted.

    The varying reds, the yellow of pride, the green of jealousy, the
    spiritual blue, and the idealistic white.

    CHAPTER V.--The Aura Kaleidoscope.

    How the trained occultist is able to ascertain the character and
    tendencies of a person.

    CHAPTER VI.--Thought Form.

    How thought forms are projected and travel. A wonderful study of a
    fascinating subject.

    CHAPTER VII.--Psychic Influence of Color.

    How certain tints affect persons favorably and others unfavorably.

    CHAPTER VIII.--Auric Magnetism.

    Magnetic healing. How to treat yourself and others by this method.

    CHAPTER IX.--Developing the Aura.

    How to build up a strong positive aura.

No. 11, 86 Pages, Paper Bound, Size 6×4-1/2




MENTAL INFLUENCE

By William Walker Atkinson

A course of Lessons on Mental Vibration, Psychic influence, Personal
Magnetism, Fascination, Psychic Self-Protection, etc.

  [Illustration: MENTAL INFLUENCE
              _by William Walker Atkinson_]


    LESSON 1.--Why one mind can be made to influence another.

    LESSON 2.--How thought waves manifest, and how they affect other
    persons.

    LESSON 3.--How mental states are transmitted.

    LESSON 4.--What mental concentration is, and how it works. The
    occult teachings regarding developing the powers of concentration.
    A course of training described and explained.

    LESSON 5.--How occultists form a mental image.

    LESSON 6.--The secret of mental fascination and personal magnetism.
    Why some have such a charming, irresistible influence. How it can
    be cultivated.

    LESSON 7.--Difference between fascination and hypnotism. How
    hypnotic influence upon others affects the person. The truth about
    hypnotism.

    LESSON 8.--Influencing at a distance. How you can exert a mental
    influence upon others at a distance. How distant treatments are
    given. The most effective occult methods and practices.

    LESSON 9.--How mental influence may be used to affect a great
    number of people at the same time.

    LESSON 10.--The need of instruction on the part of the public.

No. 7--96 Pages, Paper Bound. Size 6×4-1/2






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Practical Psychomancy and Crystal
Gazing, by William Walker Atkinson

